Training and Finetuning Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers v3 (#2104)
huggingface/blog: fine-tune-sentence-transformers-v3.md

---
title: "Training and Finetuning Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers v3"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/fine-tune-sentence-transformers-v3/st-hf-thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: tomaarsen
---

> # Training and Finetuning Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers v3

Reviewer: Let's use "fine-tune" consistently across the blog post/titles

Author: Resolved in 28097e503c5d5858670fb948bb66ab8382ba7757

> Sentence Transformers v3.0 released today: the biggest [Sentence Transformers](https://sbert.net/) update since the inception of the project. Alongside many smaller changes, the main change is a new training approach. In this blogpost, I'll be showing you how to use it to train/finetune Sentence Transformer models to improve their performance on specific tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sentence Transformers v3.0 released today: the biggest [Sentence Transformers](https://sbert.net/) update since the project's inception. Alongside many smaller changes, the main change is a new training approach. In this blogpost, I'll show how to use it to train/fine-tune Sentence Transformer models to improve their performance on specific tasks.
```

Author: Resolved in 28097e503c5d5858670fb948bb66ab8382ba7757

> Sentence Transformers v3.0 released today: the biggest [Sentence Transformers](https://sbert.net/) update since the inception of the project. Alongside many smaller changes, the main change is a new training approach. In this blogpost, I'll be showing you how to use it to train/finetune Sentence Transformer models to improve their performance on specific tasks.

Reviewer: I would avoid using "today" as it will be outdated soon

> Sentence Transformers v3.0 released today: the biggest [Sentence Transformers](https://sbert.net/) update since the inception of the project. Alongside many smaller changes, the main change is a new training approach. In this blogpost, I'll be showing you how to use it to train/finetune Sentence Transformer models to improve their performance on specific tasks.

Reviewer: Maybe add a line of what is sentence transformers?

Author: Resolved in 28097e503c5d5858670fb948bb66ab8382ba7757

> Finetuning Sentence Transformers now involves several components, including datasets, loss functions, training arguments, evaluators, and the new trainer itself. I'll go through each of these components in detail and provide examples of how to use them to train effective models.

Reviewer: Maybe add a ToC below

2. [**Loss Function**](#loss-function): A function that quantifies the model's performance and guides the optimization process.
3. [**Training Arguments**](#training-arguments) (optional): Parameters that influence training performance and tracking/debugging.
4. [**Evaluator**](#evaluator) (optional): A tool for evaluating the model before, during, or after training.
5. [**Trainer**](#trainer): Brings together the model, dataset, loss function, and other components for training.

Now, let's dive into each of these components in more detail.

## Dataset

The [`SentenceTransformerTrainer`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/sentence_transformer/SentenceTransformer.html#sentence_transformers.SentenceTransformer) uses [`datasets.Dataset`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/main/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset) or [`datasets.DatasetDict`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/main/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.DatasetDict) instances for training and evaluation. You can load data from the Hugging Face Datasets Hub or use local data in various formats such as CSV, JSON, Parquet, Arrow, or SQL.

> Note: Many Hugging Face datasets that work out of the box with Sentence Transformers have been tagged with ``sentence-transformers``, allowing you to easily find them by browsing to [https://huggingface.co/datasets?other=sentence-transformers](https://huggingface.co/datasets?other=sentence-transformers). We strongly recommend that you browse these datasets to find training datasets that might be useful for your tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Many Hugging Face datasets that work out of the box with Sentence Transformers have been tagged with `sentence-transformers`, allowing you to easily find them by browsing to [https://huggingface.co/datasets?other=sentence-transformers](https://huggingface.co/datasets?other=sentence-transformers). We strongly recommend that you browse these datasets to find training datasets that might be useful for your tasks.
```

})
```

Each key in the dictionary becomes a column in the resulting dataset.

### Dataset Format

It's crucial to ensure that your dataset format matches your chosen loss function. This involves checking two things:

1. If your loss function requires a *Label* (as indicated in the [Loss Overview](https://sbert.net/docs/sentence_transformer/loss_overview.html) table), your dataset must have a column named **"label"** or **"score"**.
2. All columns other than **"label"** or **"score"** are considered *Inputs* (as indicated in the [Loss Overview](https://sbert.net/docs/sentence_transformer/loss_overview.html) table). The number of these columns must match the number of valid inputs for your chosen loss function. The names of the columns don't matter, **only their order matters**.

For example, consider a dataset with columns `["text1", "text2", "label"]`, where the `"label"` column contains float similarity scores. This dataset can be used with `CoSENTLoss`, `AnglELoss`, and `CosineSimilarityLoss` because:

1. It has a "label" column, which is required by these loss functions.
2. It has 2 non-label columns, matching the number of inputs required by these loss functions.

> If the columns in your dataset are not ordered correctly, use [`Dataset.select_columns`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/main/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.select_columns) to reorder them. Additionally, remove any extraneous columns (e.g., `sample_id`, `metadata`, `source`, `type`) using [`Dataset.remove_columns`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/main/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.remove_columns), as they will be treated as inputs otherwise.

Reviewer: Why is the order of the columns important?

Author: I've tried to explain this better in eb7408ca1b703081c8c7b87d9744ad304c481ec8.

## Loss Function

Loss functions measure how well a model performs on a given batch of data and guide the optimization process. The choice of loss function depends on your available data and target task. Refer to the [Loss Overview](https://sbert.net/docs/sentence_transformer/loss_overview.html) for a comprehensive list of options.

> Most loss functions can be initialized with just the `SentenceTransformer` you're training and some optional parameters:

Reviewer: This sentence was not very clear to me

Author: Resolved in bcf33849862f7fbf99608176204b5ed07246499a

```python

> from datasets import load_dataset

Reviewer: I would avoid importing things that are already imported in previous cells, in general

Author: Fair enough. I think I'll keep the imports here though, for two reasons:
- I want each snippet to be fully runnable separate from each other.
- This blogpost is kind of an exposure therapy to the new way of training, so people intuitively know that `datasets` is what they need for training ST models now (instead of `InputExample` and `DataLoader`, which is what people are used to)

from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
from sentence_transformers.losses import CoSENTLoss

# Load a model to train/finetune

> model = SentenceTransformer("xlm-roberta-base")

Reviewer 2: Should this be
```suggestion
model = SentenceTransformer("FacebookAI/xlm-roberta-base")
```
instead?

Author: Both will work, but with the FacebookAI prefix is indeed more proper.

Resolved via caead00714caf302ecb9220a8a4906ba4563d6e0

- [`save_total_limit`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.save_total_limit)
- [`load_best_model_at_end`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.load_best_model_at_end)
- [`report_to`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.report_to)
- [`log_level`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.log_level)
- [`logging_steps`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.logging_steps)
- [`push_to_hub`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.push_to_hub)
- [`hub_model_id`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.hub_model_id)
- [`hub_strategy`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.hub_strategy)

> - [`hub_private_repo`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments.hub_private_repo)

Reviewer 2: I would maybe point to the original doc instead of putting this here; it would both drive users to dive into the docs, while keeping this article a bit lighter

Author: I agree, that would be wise.

Author: Resolved in d8e28527047a699f640b470e15d049480d4e016b

Here's an example of how to initialize [`SentenceTransformersTrainingArguments`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/sentence_transformer/training_args.html#sentencetransformertrainingarguments):

```python
from sentence_transformers.training_args import SentenceTransformerTrainingArguments

args = SentenceTransformerTrainingArguments(
    # Required parameter:
    output_dir="models/mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet",
    # Optional training parameters:
    num_train_epochs=1,
    per_device_train_batch_size=16,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=16,
    warmup_ratio=0.1,
    fp16=True,  # Set to False if your GPU can't handle FP16
    bf16=False,  # Set to True if your GPU supports BF16
    batch_sampler=BatchSamplers.NO_DUPLICATES,  # Losses using "in-batch negatives" benefit from no duplicates
    # Optional tracking/debugging parameters:
    eval_strategy="steps",
    eval_steps=100,
    save_strategy="steps",
    save_steps=100,
    save_total_limit=2,
    logging_steps=100,

>     run_name="mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet",  # Used in W&B if `wandb` is installed

Reviewer: Missing closing this
```suggestion
    run_name="mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet"  # Used in W&B if `wandb` is installed
)
```

Author: Modern formatters prefer the comma, even at the end, so I'll keep it as-is

| [`RerankingEvaluator`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/sentence_transformer/evaluation.html#rerankingevaluator) | List of {'query': '..', 'positive': [...], 'negative': [...]} dictionaries. |
| [`TranslationEvaluator`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/sentence_transformer/evaluation.html#translationevaluator) | Pairs of sentences in two separate languages. |
| [`TripletEvaluator`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/sentence_transformer/evaluation.html#tripletevaluator) | (anchor, positive, negative) pairs. |

Additionally, you can use [`SequentialEvaluator`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/sentence_transformer/evaluation.html#sequentialevaluator) to combine multiple evaluators into one, which can then be passed to the [`SentenceTransformerTrainer`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/sentence_transformer/SentenceTransformer.html#sentence_transformers.SentenceTransformer). The `eval_strategy` and `eval_steps` training arguments determine when the evaluator is run.

If you don't have the necessary evaluation data but still want to track the model's performance on common benchmarks, you can use these evaluators with data from Hugging Face:

> ### EmbeddingSimilarityEvaluator with STSb

Reviewer: Maybe add a line of what STSb is

Author: Resolved via f8f38d7d272020ca1171e4ac6ccd020b514718f1

    eval_strategy="steps",
    eval_steps=100,
    save_strategy="steps",
    save_steps=100,
    save_total_limit=2,
    logging_steps=100,
    run_name="mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet",  # Used in W&B if `wandb` is installed
)

# 6. (Optional) Create an evaluator & evaluate the base model
dev_evaluator = TripletEvaluator(
    anchors=eval_dataset["anchor"],
    positives=eval_dataset["positive"],
    negatives=eval_dataset["negative"],
    name="all-nli-dev",
)
dev_evaluator(model)

# 7. Create a trainer & train
trainer = SentenceTransformerTrainer(
    model=model,
    args=args,
    train_dataset=train_dataset,
    eval_dataset=eval_dataset,
    loss=loss,
    evaluator=dev_evaluator,
)
trainer.train()

# (Optional) Evaluate the trained model on the test set
test_evaluator = TripletEvaluator(
    anchors=test_dataset["anchor"],
    positives=test_dataset["positive"],
    negatives=test_dataset["negative"],
    name="all-nli-test",
)
test_evaluator(model)

# 8. Save the trained model
model.save_pretrained("models/mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet/final")

# 9. (Optional) Push it to the Hugging Face Hub
model.push_to_hub("mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet")
```

> In this example I'm finetuning from [`microsoft/mpnet-base`](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/mpnet-base), i.e. a foundational model that is not yet a Sentence Transformer model. This requires more training data than finetuning an existing Sentence Transformer model, like [`all-mpnet-base-v2`](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example I'm finetuning from [`microsoft/mpnet-base`](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/mpnet-base), a base model that is not yet a Sentence Transformer model. This requires more training data than finetuning an existing Sentence Transformer model, like [`all-mpnet-base-v2`](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2).
```

Author: Resolved via 69200f45b20acb8f5d3879db78cf4d7ba98a0212

> After running this script, the [tomaarsen/mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet](https://huggingface.co/tomaarsen/mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet) model was uploaded for me. The triplet accuracy using cosine similarity, i.e. what percentage of the time `cosine_similarity(anchor, positive) > cosine_similarity(anchor, negative)` is 90.04% for the development set and 91.5% for the testing set! For reference, the [`microsoft/mpnet-base`](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/mpnet-base) model scored only 68.32% on the dev set before training.

Reviewer: Nice!

> All of this information is stored in the automatically generated model card, including the base model, maximum sequence length, output dimensionality, similarity function, training dataset, language, license, usage, evaluation results, training & evaluation dataset (dataset name, size, approximate statistics, examples), hyperparameters, training logs, environmental impact, training hardware, framework versions, and citations. Without any effort, your uploaded models should contain all the information that your potential users would need to determine whether your model is suitable for them.

Author: @osanseviero Curious about whether you think this paragraph is a bit "much"? My intention is to push people to look at the model card for https://huggingface.co/tomaarsen/mpnet-base-all-nli-triplet.

Reviewer: Yes, maybe just have few of them

Author: I already had such a feeling, fixed it in 598ee57ca21e262d954b46cf97d27e850627235e
